Create delegation_staking.md (#7953)
aptos-labs/aptos-core: developer-docs-site/docs/concepts/delegated_staking.md

---
title: "Delegated Staking"
slug: " Delegated staking"
---
import ThemedImage from '@theme/ThemedImage';
import useBaseUrl from '@docusaurus/useBaseUrl';

# Delegated Staking

## Delegated Staking on the Aptos Blockchain

> :::tip Consensus We strongly recommend that you read about [Staking](../concepts/staking.md) on the Aptos Blockchain first. :::

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::tip We strongly recommend that you read about [Staking](../concepts/staking.md) first. :::
```

> :::tip Consensus We strongly recommend that you read the consensus section of Aptos Blockchain Deep Dive before proceeding further. :::

Reviewer 2: since this is an extension of staking protocol, feel this should replace by asking people to read the staking doc first

> Delegated staking is an extension of the staking protocol on Aptos. A delegation pool abstracts the stake owner to an entity capable of collecting stake from delegators and adding it on their behalf to the native stake pool attached to the validator. This means that multiple entities can stake to a stake pool to reach the minimum requirement for the validator to join the validator set. Delegators can add stake to an inactive pool, but the delegation pool will not earn rewards until it is active. 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Delegated staking is an extension of the staking protocol. A delegation pool abstracts the stake owner to an entity capable of collecting stake from delegators and adding it on their behalf to the native stake pool attached to the validator. This allows multiple entities to form a stake pool that achieves the minimum requirements for the validator to join the validator set. While delegators can add stake to an inactive pool, the delegation pool will not earn rewards until it is active.
```

> :::danger Delegation pools are permissionless and anyone can stake to the validator. You cannot change the type of stake pool once it's created. For full details of the stake pool, see [Staking](../concepts/staking.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
:::danger Delegation pools are permissionless and anyone can add stake. Stake pools cannot be changed once it's created, though it can be removed from the validator set and assets withdrawn. For full details of the stake pool, see [Staking](../concepts/staking.md)
```

> :::danger Delegation pools are permissionless and anyone can stake to the validator. You cannot change the type of stake pool once it's created. For full ownership of the stake pool, see [Staking](../concepts/staking.md)

Reviewer 2: "For full ownership of the stake pool" what does this mean? maybe you mean "For full details of the stake pool"?

Author: as in there can only be one stake owner/they don't want any delegators. I'll change it to full details of the stake pool since that is described in the staking doc

::: 

> See [delegation_pool.move](https://github.com/aptos-labs/aptos-core/blob/main/aptos-move/framework/aptos-framework/sources/delegation_pool.move) 

Reviewer 2: update to "For the full delegation pool smart contract, see..."

> A delegation pool can be initialized without adding stake. A resource account is created along with an empty stake pool it owns from that point on.This account will manage the stake of the underlying stake pool on behalf of the delegators by forwarding their stake-management operations to it (add, unlock, reactivate, withdraw) while the resource account cannot be directly accessed nor externally owned.

Reviewer 2: "A delegation pool can be initialized without adding stake." -> "A delegation pool can be initialized with zero stake."

> Unlike a stake pool, a delegation pool can be initialized with zero stake. A resource account is created along with an empty stake pool it owns from that point on.This account will manage the stake of the underlying stake pool on behalf of the delegators by forwarding their stake-management operations to it (add, unlock, reactivate, withdraw) while the resource account cannot be directly accessed nor externally owned.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Unlike a stake pool, a delegation pool can be initialized with zero stake. When initialized, the delegated stake pool is owned indirectly via a resource account.  This account will manage the stake of the underlying stake pool on behalf of the delegators by forwarding their stake-management operations to it (add, unlock, reactivate, withdraw) while the resource account cannot be directly accessed nor externally owned.
```

can you add a pointer to resource accounts?

> See [Delegation Pool Operations](../nodes/validator-node/operator/delegation-pool-operations.md)

Reviewer 2: update to "See full list of delegation pool operations ..."

![image](https://user-images.githubusercontent.com/120680608/234953723-ae6cc89e-76d8-4014-89f3-ec8799c7b281.png)

There are four entity types:

- Owner
- Operator
- Voter
- Delegator

Using this model, the owner does not have to stake on the Aptos blockchain in order to run a validator. 

[How Validation on the Aptos blockchain works](../concepts/staking.md#validation-on-the-aptos-blockchain)

### Owner

> The delegation pool owner performs the following operations:

Reviewer 2: update to "The delegation pool owner has the following capabilities:"

1. Creates delegation pool
2. Assigns operator for the delegation pool
3. Sets operator commission percentage for the delegation pool
4. Assigns voter for the delegation pool

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Operator

> A node operator is assigned by the pool owner to run the validator node. The operator performs the following operations:

Reviewer 2: The operator has following capabilities

1. Join or leave the validator set once the delegation pool reaches 1M APT

> 2. Perform validating functions

Reviewer 2: what is "Perform validating functions"?

3. Change the consensus key and network addresses. The consensus key is used to participate in the validator consensus process, i.e., to vote and propose a block. The operator is allowed to change ("rotate") this key in case this key is compromised.

The operator receives commission that is distributed automatically at the end of each epoch as rewards. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

### Voter

> An owner can designate a voter. This enables the voter to participate in governance. The voter  will use the voter key to sign the governance votes in the transactions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
An owner can designate a voter. This enables the voter to participate in governance. The voter will use the voter key to sign the governance votes in the transactions.
```

might be good start in notion?

:::tip Governance
This document describes staking. See [Governance](./governance.md) for how to participate in the Aptos on-chain governance using the owner-voter model.
:::

### Delegator

A delegator is anyone who has stake in the delegation pool. Delegators earn rewards on their stake minus any commissions for the operator. Delegators can perform the following delegator operations:

1. Add stake
2. Unlock stake
3. Reactivate stake
4. Withdraw stake

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

6. Operator must wait until the new epoch starts before their validator becomes active.

:::tip Joining the validator set
For step-by-step instructions on how to join the validator set, see: [Joining Validator Set](../nodes/validator-node/operator/staking-pool-operations.md#joining-validator-set).
:::

### Automatic lockup duration

When the operator joins the validator set, the delegation pool's stake will automatically be locked up for a fixed duration that is set by the Aptos governance. Delegators will follow the delegation pool's lockup cycle. 

### Automatic lockup renewal

When the lockup period expires, it will be automatically renewed, so that the validator can continue to validate and receive the rewards. 

### Unlocking your stake

Delegators can unlock stake at any time. However, the stake will only become withdrawable after the delegation pool's lockup period expires. Unlocked stake will continue earning rewards until the stake becomes withdrawable. 

### Resetting the lockup

Lockup cannot be reset. 

> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
```

## Rewards

Rewards for delegated staking are calculated by using:

1. The rewards_rate, an annual percentage yield (APY), i.e., rewards accrue as a compound interest on your current staked amount.
2. Delegator stake
3. [Validator rewards performance](../concepts/staking.md#rewards-formula)

> 
> See [Computing delegation pool rewards](../nodes/validator-node/operator/delegation-pool-operations.md#compute-delegation-pool-rewards-earned)
> 
> 

Reviewer: ```suggestion
See [Computing delegation pool rewards](../nodes/validator-node/operator/delegation-pool-operations.md#compute-delegation-pool-rewards-earned)
```
